# Information to work with

## Develop

From the root run:

```
make clean
make install
make dev
```

This will take care of all the various elements needed

## Front matter

There is a number of front matter values that you can use to guide how markdown
pages work. These are documented below:

* `author`: person who is authoring the page
* `date`: yyyy-mm-dd hh:MM:ss+TZ:TZ
* `layout`: post | page (post for blog entry, page for general page)
* `slug`: what the url should look like after the prefix
* `title`: Page title to be used
* `[small-title]`: `true|false` Default: false. Set title to be smaller style to fit
* `[large-title]`: `true|false` Default: false. Set title to be larger style to fit
* `tags`: set of tags that can be seen
* `[excerpt]`: short summary of the page that appears on lists and featured slots.
    Default: Autogenerated from first paragraph.
* `[twitter_excerpt]`: short summary used in twitter and other social cards.
    Default: none
* `[featureimage]`: assumes /img/posts/ so name of file to be used. Default
    is that it will just use a gradient fill in header
* `[featureimage-position]`: %x %y position adjustment for feature image. Default: 50% 50%
* `[imageby]`: Attribution text for who made the image (eg flickr, unsplash etc)
    Default: no text
* `[imagelink]`: Link to source image and attribution point
    Default: no link
* `[listimage]`: Relative url assuming starting point of `/img/` to small image for listing
    Default: no image supplied
* `[listimage-position]`: x% y%. Default: none - used to shift image position for listing
* `[featured]`: `true` | `false`. Default: `false`

## Build

To run a build locally to see if it works. From the root run

```
make clean
make install
make build
```

You shouldn't get any errors.

## Publish

Publishing is done via github actions where the built content is then synchronised
up to AWS S3.
