---
author: ajfisher
date: 2024-04-16 19:00:00+11:00
layout: post
slug: now-or-never-growth-opportunities-in-retail
title: "Now or never: harnessing growth opportunities in retail"
tags: ai, strategy, business, retail, growth
excerpt: >
    Amidst a wave of layoffs in the tech sector, retail and consumer businesses
    have a unique chance to leverage cutting-edge technology and talent,
    creating an opportunity for growth and innovation.
twitter_excerpt: >
    Explore how non-tech businesses can capitalise on recent tech layoffs to
    boost their own innovation and growth. Strategic insights for navigating
    AI, talent and automation. 🚀📈 #RetailInnovation #Retail #AI #strategy
featureimage: ../../img/posts/retail-opportunity-dalle-2024-04-16212738.webp
imageby: ajfisher - Retail Innovation Opportunities - Dall-E 3
listimage: ../../img/posts/retail-opportunity-dalle-2024-04-16212738.webp
featured: true
---

If you’re not part of Big-Tech or Big-Finance, or Australia’s  [Grocery
Duopoly](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-02-23/a-history-of-the-duopoly-coles-woolworths/103494070),
your business is likely navigating significant challenges. Investment in
additional headcount, new systems, or process is probably quite a way down your
list of priorities - behind a lot of optimisation, and just trading through the
rough patch. However, for growth-minded organisations with some financial
flexibility, there is an opportunity to acquire experienced talent to drive the
next wave of growth and innovation for the business.

The COVID-19 pandemic forced a rapid acceleration in digital transformation,
prompting businesses to launch many initiatives. Yet, facing economic pressures
as consumers become more discretionary in their purchasing, many have since
scaled back - delaying or descoping these projects.

![Empty store for let](../../img/posts/the-blowup-0EQJEuCO9JA-unsplash.jpg)
*[Retail spaces have struggled to recover. Photo by the blowup on
Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-black-and-white-photo-of-a-sign-on-the-floor-0EQJEuCO9JA)*


While Big Tech and Finance have been the main beneficiaries of what growth has
happened in the last five years (eg [the Magnificent
Seven](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/seven-samurai-mag-markets-rescue-aswath-damodaran-eu9mc/)),
they, and others, are now generating layoffs - about 50,000 people in the first
two months of 2024 so far. As we emerge from the bottom of the business
cycle, there is an opportunity for savvy Retail and Consumer organisations to
benefit.

If your business is profitable, but faces cyclical challenges, such as Retail -
right now you are able to pick up some extraordinary talent from big-tech and
finance. Point them at your hardest business problems to get the groundwork
done, and you can capitalise as consumer sentiment improves and spending
increases again.

For the purposes of this post, I’m mostly considering Retail, Consumer Products
and Services businesses as these are domains I know very well. Over the last six
to nine months I have had many conversations with leaders in these sectors that
have influenced my thinking on this topic.

In this post, I’ll outline some of the challenges businesses have had to
navigate over the last couple of years, why tech firms are laying off staff, and
what the opportunity is for organisations who can capitalise on it.

## Consumer businesses - between a rock and a hard place

Even though COVID-19 dramatically impacted recent business performance, the
challenges began earlier. 2018 and 2019 already posed significant difficulties
for many organisations due to a decade of rising living costs and stagnant wages
after the Great Recession, compounded by global events like France's [Mouvement
des gilets jaunes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_vests_protests), Hong
Kong's [Water
Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019%E2%80%932020_Hong_Kong_protests),
and Australia's [Black
Summer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019%E2%80%9320_Australian_bushfire_season).

![Hong Kong protests, 2019](../../img/posts/joseph-chan-I23WeOTsA8M-unsplash.jpg)
*[Over 1M people protested in Hong Kong in 2019. Photo by Joseph Chan on
Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/aerial-photography-of-four-cars-surrounded-with-people-I23WeOTsA8M)*

I highlight this pre-pandemic period because trying to hire into retail
businesses was already challenging. Businesses didn’t have a lot of spare cash
to invest in more headcount and candidates were already scarce. This was because
Finance and Big Tech were already into their run up as they started to
capitalise on technology advances to do with new architectural patterns (eg
[micro-services](https://microservices.io/) and composable architecture) and the
first shoots of AI and ML technologies showing benefits (eg voice, NLP,
classifiers etc).

The implication of this was that in consumer businesses, that were not digital
pure-plays, projects were already falling behind and teams had persistent
vacancies that were challenging to fill. Some outsourcing occurred to keep
projects moving, but this is not sustainable long term due to the cost.

By March 2020, every consumer business in the world was facing the choice of
willingly or begrudgingly expediting their entire digital transformation, or
have almost certain collapse as a result of physical retail closing overnight.
At the same time, Big-Tech saw a rapid increase in sales due to vast numbers of
the population spending more time on screen and in their houses.

The net effect was that Big-Tech and, to a lesser extent Finance, found
themselves in a position where they had money coming in at unprecedented rates
and were able to attract significant amounts of talent with high wages, who
could work from anywhere remotely and continue to drive their digital business
growth. On the flip-side, consumer businesses were faced with the impossible
task of completing two to five years of work in six months with increasing
uncertainty around their jobs.

Consumer <b>organisations that managed to stay afloat faced stiff competition for
talent</b>, often being outbid by tech giants like Google, Meta, and Amazon, where
even junior roles commanded salary premiums of 40-90%, not to mention superior
benefits. Vacancies continued to grow.

After COVID there has been a significant decrease in consumer sentiment and
spending and consumer businesses have found themselves in a precarious
position - grappling with significant revenue challenges lacking the willingness
to invest in headcount or expensive projects. Throughout 2023 and into 2024,
many organisations have faced into extreme prioritisation, scaling back
initiatives and managing costs ever-more aggressively - a necessary, but
short-sighted strategy, given the long-term potential of these projects.

In 2024, from my conversations and interactions with numerous organisations,
this has become the dominant behaviour for many Direct to consumer businesses.
Deliver core business well, drive profitability and, focus on a smaller number
of high-value opportunities.

This all poses a question though: After an astonishing boom and the sustained
dominance of Big Tech and Finance over the last half-decade, why are we now
seeing continued layoffs in these sectors? This shift is not just a market
correction for some COVID-19 over-hiring, but a signal of deeper changes afoot.

In the next section, I delve into the reasons behind these layoffs and how these
underlying shifts may open a golden opportunity for consumer businesses in the
next business cycle.

## Inside out - tech’s first target is itself

It's well-known that new technologies can displace workers, typically those in
lower-skilled roles, however the technology industry often focusses on itself
first, automating its operations and optimising internally before seeking to
impact other sectors.

This internal focus stems primarily from an ongoing war for talent coupled with
a relentless drive for profitability.

Technology sectors have historically grappled with a persistent shortage of
skilled workers. The demands on even entry-level technology professionals have
escalated significantly over the past two decades, intensifying the challenge.
Each year, the industry's demand for talent consistently exceeds the supply of
new graduates, a trend that shows no signs of abating and [looks to be getting
worse](https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2021-09-13-gartner-survey-reveals-talent-shortages-as-biggest-barrier-to-emerging-technologies-adoption).

Given this persistent context, for technology-led businesses a long-term
beneficial strategy has been to invest heavily in automation to free up talent
to work on more difficult problems. This allows you to scale by removing
bottlenecks (instead of Jane being the only person who can do a task, now
everyone in the team can leverage Jane’s automations and she can move on to the
next hard problem) and it can drive profitability (I can have my team working on
more innovation or higher value work that I can charge more for rather than
routine work which quickly becomes devalued).

![Working to digitise processes](../../img/posts/scott-graham-5fNmWej4tAA-unsplash.jpg)
*[Photo by Scott Graham on
Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/person-holding-pencil-near-laptop-computer-5fNmWej4tAA)*

No part of technology has been spared from this effect.

The virtualisation of computers spurred rapid advancements in automation,
streamlining the management of virtual machines and networking. This evolution
catalysed the growth of cloud-based infrastructure, which in turn facilitated
more sophisticated applications and data management strategies. These
technologies laid the groundwork for the development of complex machine learning
pipelines and on-demand AI models, further reducing the need for extensive human
intervention.

Despite an exponential increase in applications driven by these technologies and
rising consumer demand, the workforce has not expanded at the same rate.
Automation enables existing professionals to manage larger technology ecosystems
more efficiently, thereby enhancing business value.

In recent years, AI's viability has surged. <b>Before ChatGPT made headlines in
late 2022, tech organisations were already leveraging early tools to automate</b>
code generation, content validation, natural language tasks, and data analysis,
significantly easing the burden on overstretched teams.

As more sophisticated AI tools landed, this has been like pouring petrol on the
fire of automation.

With cultures of innovation, optimisation and automation entrenched in most tech
organisations, these tools have enabled even more rapid development and more
value creation.

Given all of this, why would tech companies be laying people off? Surely they
are better retained in the organisation?

In late 2022, the main factor was cost rationalisation. The boom that many tech
companies had experienced was COVID related and those gains began to reverse.
Many organisations decided to downsize for what looked like a recession and get
ahead of that. In 2023, for many markets, this recession didn’t occur however
business conditions were more challenging and those businesses that shrank their
workforces were considerably more profitable (eg Meta, Microsoft and Amazon).

Recently, additional layoffs have occurred that are smaller in total size,
however much more broadly based. Here too, businesses are rationalising their
cost base to show higher margins and profitability to the market (the days of
“burn baby burn” when it comes to cash with few profits are definitely behind
us) however they aren’t doing away with whole teams. Rather, as various AI and
automation tools are becoming effective they are taking a small chunk out of
many jobs so instead of a team of 10 to do the work, this may be rationalised to
a team of 9 instead. Hiring has much reduced from the heady days of 2020-2021 as
well, with fewer roles advertised - particularly for entry positions.

![An iPhone with many AI apps installed](../../img/posts/solen-feyissa-hWSNT_Pp4x4-unsplash.jpg)
*[AI tooling for teams has multiplied rapidly. Photo by Solen Feyissa on
Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-person-holding-a-cell-phone-in-their-hand-hWSNT_Pp4x4)*

When you look at the output however, you see the full picture - these slightly
smaller teams are delivering the same output (or more in the case of Meta in
particular). This is improving their margins and profit - so the rationale for
downsizing the workforce is well founded.

A lot of this isn’t purely AI related, it’s the combination of opportunities
brought about by cloud technologies, automation and AI that have taken time to
pull together, however it is supercharging the productivity of teams.

These factors occurring concurrently provide opportunities for those
businesses - particularly Retail - who are prepared to Zig while everyone else
continues to Zag.

In the final section, I explore how to take advantage of these opportunities now
and race ahead while your competitors are still putting on their running shoes.

## Tech layoffs may be retail payoffs

The persistent challenges in the consumer non-tech sector have squeezed
capabilities and hindered the delivery of transformational changes within
organisations. Meanwhile, technology-led organisations have created
disproportionate value by leveraging automation, AI, and data, relative to the
size of their teams.

What should retail and consumer businesses do as digital sophistication rapidly
increases but funding for innovation remains scarce?

Quite simply, you need to invest smartly but you need to go now - and I mean
right now - 2025 will be too late.

Consumer and Retail businesses should seize the opportunity to strategically
hire experts in Architecture, Data, AI, and Automation. <b>Complementing these
strategic hires with eager juniors currently struggling to find roles can
maximise impact</b>.

Start by hiring experienced team members who have direct, first hand experience
in:

- Architecting large, distributed applications and enterprise technology with
  composability at its core and micro-services throughout.
- Data engineering to extract valuable data from the organisation and make it
  available to  products and services.
- Pragmatic AI capabilities whether in using off the shelf models for enhancing
  existing products or refining processes or leveraging AI-based tooling that
  can improve productivity (eg engineers with AI-copilot or AI-DevOps
  experience)
- Automation engineers who can help remove tasks from existing digital and
  business teams and create opportunities for those staff to work on higher
  value activities.

To scale and innovate effectively, integrate enthusiastic early-career
professionals into your team, supporting them with AI copilot tools and DevOps
practices. This approach allows juniors to rapidly assume significant roles,
driving forward your transformation objectives.

This addresses the hiring side, with a view of seeding these skills into the
team. Alongside that needs to be a clear strategy that leveraging automation,
utilising AI-based tooling and copilots and use of low or no-code solutions or
frameworks to achieve outcomes is critical to the ability of the organisation to
execute.

This focus on methods, and the change management required to support that in
existing teams, should help to start to create momentum inside the organisation
to deliver at a higher cadence.

Simultaneously, <b>businesses must adapt by adopting AI copilots and adjacent
technologies</b> to automate processes, enhance classification, support services,
and improve customer experiences.

Done right, this will help free up valuable time from over stretched staff who
can work on projects that further transformation, work on supporting higher
value customers or helping expansion into new channels or markets.

Additionally, the business should invest in low or no-code application platforms
and extensively train business users in their use. Many of the market leading
tools already leverage automation and AI capabilities for rapid delivery.
Layered onto a composable architecture and a well understood integration
ecosystem, business users can rapidly automate business processes, create
micro-applications to service their needs, and deliver rapid change themselves.
This will free up key technology resources to invest in innovation or high-value
platform creation.

![An image with the word change](../../img/posts/nick-fewings-5RjdYvDRNpA-unsplash.jpg)
*[Create opportunities for organisational changes. Photo by Nick Fewings on
Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/a-black-and-white-photo-of-the-word-change-5RjdYvDRNpA)*

While the outlined approach offers numerous benefits, it also carries inherent
risks that must be carefully managed to ensure successful outcomes. Before
embarking on this journey, here are some items to consider:

- Prioritise architecture and full-stack engineering if your organisation lacks
  architectural maturity, such as insufficient micro-services or integration
  layers. This foundational work is critical in supporting the approaches
  discussed in this post.
- Implement clear guidelines for AI copilot usage, focusing on data safeguards
  and team responsibilities to prevent inadvertent data leaks. Proper training
  and governance are essential in ensuring safe and effective use.
- Support junior team members with robust mentoring and onboarding programmes to
  integrate into their teams. Strong cultural processes are essential for their
  success and future growth in the organisation.
- Ensure the accurate assessment of capabilities in prospective candidates by
  possibly engaging an external 'Advisory CTO' or similar expert for advanced
  domains. This expertise is vital for recruiting senior roles, who can then
  assist in onboarding junior team members.

Retail and consumer organisations, whilst they start behind, have a golden
opportunity to bring to bear a number of significant trends coupled with a
specific set of people who can drive innovation and opportunity for the
business.

## In case of emergency, break glass

The convergence of available talent, cutting-edge technologies, and urgent
innovation needs presents a unique opportunity for retail and consumer
businesses. Capitalise on this moment by strategically hiring experts in
architecture, data, AI, and automation, and support them with eager,
early-career professionals. This combination will build a resilient,
forward-thinking team ready for rapid innovation and deployment.

Act now. The talent is available, but won't remain so indefinitely, and
competitors may also be eyeing this advantage. New technologies provide an
opportunity for generational leap-frogging that will help you quickly create new
opportunities for profit or elevate your customer experience. Don’t hesitate;
those who act decisively have an incredible opportunity at their feet.

Imagine a future where your business not only survives but thrives, leading the
rapidly evolving retail landscape. By acting now, you're not just adapting;
you'll be setting the pace for innovation and success.
